# Introduction

Welcome to the Piazza User Guide. It contains descriptions of Piazza's main features and many
pieces of example code showing how to use those features. This document is aimed at developers
looking to build services and applications that use Piazza. (In contrast, the _Developer Guide_
is aimed at developers wishing to work on the Piazza codebase itself. The _DevOps Guide_ is for
administrators looking to deploy and manage Piazza instances.)

## Piazza In Brief

Piazza is a set of open source, cloud-based services aimed at helping users (developers) build
GeoInt applications and services. These services are exposed via REST endpoints, providing
developers with the ability to:

Load data into the system:: Given a reference to an external data source, Piazza can extract
metadata and other information about that data and record it locally under a unique ID. Piazza now
"knows" about that data. These data sources can be files, such as a GeoTIFF in an S3 bucket, or
features, such as from a Shapefile or PostGIS database. (Note that while Piazza typically needs to
read the data source's contents, it does not need to store a copy of it locally.)

Access data from the system:: Having loaded data into the system, Piazza can create access points
such as OGC endpoints or download links. Users can access the data by passing requests
to Piazza, using the data resource's ID.

Search data within the system:: Piazza stores the metadata about the data sources, allowing users
to submit queries and receive in return a list of data resources matching the criteria.

Execute external services:: Users will wish to execute external web services, such as querying a
gazetteer for a given location or extracting vector features from an image. Services can be
registered by providing REST endpoints, descriptions, and parameter lists, and then Piazza can execute
these services on the user's behalf. The services can reference data loaded into Piazza (using the
data resource ID) or externally via URL.

Detect events and trigger actions:: Piazza allows users to define "types" of events, such as the
loading of a new file within a certain bounding box or the successful completion of an external
service; the events can be generated from within the system or sent to the system from the outside.
Users can then define actions to be taken when certain event conditions are met, thus allowing
Piazza to be responsible for executing simple "workflows" of activities.

Piazza is not unique in its ability to offer these services. Developers could for example, use a
message queueing system to implement their own eventing and triggering system, or could stand up
their own WPS server for invoking external services. It is our position, however, that in many
cases developers shouldn't have to. For many common needs, Piazza can provide a simple alternative.
